okay let's let's start at the shallow
end of the swimming pool because for
most of you watching this video it's at
the shallow end that you're gonna have
your struggles in life that you're gonna
be splashing water on one another um how
do you handle the issue of menarche ism
libertarianism anarchism
anarcho-capitalism how do you handle
these types of claims whether we think
of them as political economy political
philosophy how do you handle them when
your loved ones tell you that they
sincerely support or represent the
position how do you handle them well
maybe your co-workers and colleagues
come to you stating these these
convictions my own thoughts about this
end of the swimming pool shall we say
have not changed in 20 years but what
has changed for me is that I've had more
and more experience targeting people
face to face or sometimes through a
medium like Skype over the internet with
people who sincerely you know advance
these views and I think that most of
them have in a sense never really put
their own beliefs on trial have never
really tested them against any
reasonable standard precisely because
they're they're just shocking enough
that people who disagree with them will
tend to shut up and slink away that most
people just will not want to have the
conversation and because the their
political platform is just removed
enough from reality it's just enough
steps removed from anything that could
be implemented in real life that they
don't really think it through and it's
in its practical implications nor were
they drawn into debates or forms of
political activism where they they would
have to they would have to prove the
practicality or the implement ability of
their political vision so by contrast if
you make the very broad statement that
you think poor people should not be
deprived of the right to have surgery
say a life-saving surgery just because
they lack the ability to pay they lack
the money right away someone can reply
to that by saying oh well yes but do you
that you should actually implement
single-payer health care or some other
do you believe that the government
should be able to intrude into the
private sector in order to force doctors
to provide surgery for free they may ask
any number of questions that then
immediately challenge your belief not in
the question of is this or is this not a
good belief in some isolated and
abstract sense but they're challenging
you to take your belief and prove that
it has some practical value if it were
to be implemented in this real world as
as policy so that's the type of thinking
I think that anarchists and integral
capitalists really lack exercise in
doing and even the more respectable
counterparts of those philosophies
libertarians and in Minorca they really
tend to lack that kind of practical
experience so um
start with an allegory but it's an
allegory that that overlaps with with
the case I want to talk about here
there was a brief fad for anti debt
hysteria and anti banking hysteria and
this was a little bit more left-wing
but certainly included a lot of
libertarians this happened back in the
the the the we are the 99% movement the
Occupy Wall Street movement and there
was another movement that to some extent
tried to co-opt that that excitement to
some extent really was part of that
movement referred to as the zeitgeist
movement so again some libertarians were
involved that some leftists some kind of
recovering socialists looking for a new
a new hat to wear and the sort of thing
definitely some some anarchists too so
those movements had in common a deep
hostility towards bank loans and debt
and I had a fairly long dialogue with a
proponent of that view at the time so
someone who was really chuffed by the
success the short-term success of that
movement that it had these street
protests that many people attended and I
said to him simply I said so so the view
you're presenting of the world is that
it is an advantage not to have access to
bank loans you know you've just
explained to me that you think it's a
terrible thing that it's a blight on
humanity that it's a form of enslavement
for people to receive a loan for people
to go into debt you know so so you
actually gets disadvantageous for you
know middle-class people or
working-class people to to receive bank
loans so so within the history of the
United States of America we have a very
clear test case here under segregation
under racial segregation in the United
States after the end of slavery but
before maybe nineteen eighty African
American people did not have access to
bank loans credit cards debt home loans
etc the same way that white people did
they didn't have absolutely zero access
to banking this is an incredibly
well-known incredibly well attested you
know fact it's one of the reasons why
was very difficult for black people to
become business owners and home owners
and so on in the post-world War two
period but even going back before that
let's go through the whole period of you
know so-called segregation slavery is
over but black people don't have a
quality yet in unit states in this long
period of time if if you believe this
theory you should be able to point to
that history and say what a tremendous
advantage african-americans had because
they did not have these loans they did
not have access to debt now that
discussion in and of itself I can say
was devastating for the other person I
was debating now what am i doing in that
debate this is not Socratic method this
is not even debating with them the
merits of their belief or their
political position it's not questioning
whether or not their beliefs or their
values are good because that's what
they're used to
what anarchists are used to debating is
whether or not their ideology in a sort
of packaged form separated from reality
and its consequences if we're
implemented whether or not it is it is
good
in an abstract sense so this is like you
know taking a tool out of the contents
taught out of the context of the
workshop and placing it in a display
case in a museum and saying is this a
good tool or not well we might be able
to judge whether or not it looks pretty
when it's on display in a museum in an
art gallery but that's not really what I
want to do I want to take it back into
the workshop and see see what the
outcomes are see whether or not it can
scratch and cut whether or not it can
and can do the job shall we say of
cutting and polishing gemstones when we
when we put it to the test and it's
remarkable to me the people who really
deeply and passionately have these sorts
of convictions for example the
conviction that debt and banking is some
kind of terrible blood and humanity how
quickly those deeply held beliefs fall
apart when we just invite them to take a
few foot steps down the road of proving
the concept just thinking through what
are the necessary consequences if that
were true and if that were taken
seriously within the remit of mainstream
politics and of course you know it is
not now in the same way I had a debate
or discussion not too long ago with an
anarcho-capitalist with a sincerely
believing in ergo capitalist via voice
chat similar to Skype and I presented
him with the the very clear parallel
within the history United States America
so what you're saying is what you as an
anarcho-capitalist are claiming and
again he anarcho-capitalism in many ways
is a more rude and transparent
presentation of the same set of values
and priorities that can appear in the
guise of menarche ism or libertarianism
especially right-wing libertarianism
left-wing libertarianism - to some
extent so the the case you're presenting
to me is that people would be much
better off that have tremendous
advantages if they were not burdened by
access to government provided health
care access to government provided
education access to government provided
roads electricity you know and these
these other services and I said though
you know and and that and that basically
the less of these things they have the
they would be not to mention of course
taxes but you know there - the whole
issue of Taxation is fetishized and
unbelievable extend these these
ideologies said so tell me when you look
at the history the United States over
the last 500 years do you see evidence
that indigenous Americans Native
Americans American Indians sorry I'm
just filling the way some people watch
these videos English is not their first
language
I mean groups like the Navajo people who
were you know indigenous to North
America before they were conquered by by
Europeans people like the Navajo and the
Mohawks so on and so forth do you see
that those people have had tremendous
advantages or tremendous disadvantages
when you compare their communities to
the white European settler communities
there in some cases adjacent to them
that had much more much better access to
those same government services now this
is a case-by-case issue but especially
if you're talking about over 500 years
there are many many cases where you can
point to a native reservation and see
that it was from a from a left-wing
perspective from a mainstream leveling
perspective the native reservation was
in a state of neglect you say it was not
receiving government health care was not
receiving electricity or running water
in pipes or sewage and sewage treatment
we still have these problems in Canada
still this day that they either were not
receiving education at all or receiving
very little education or only education
provided by charitable Grob charitable
groups like Christian missionaries but
not government education and then step
by step again for talking with the full
500 years obviously within the last
thirty years there's been an effort to
try to catch up and provide indigenous
peoples in their reservations even with
colleges but for a very long time there
were these government services were
either lacking or were really absent you
can find examples trout peoples who were
really completely neglected with these
government services if you believe this
as an integral capitalist if this is
your doctrine when we have two people
living adjacent to one another
one of whom is being given these
government services that you say are bad
and another whom another group being
deprived of them we should see all the
benefits that you're claiming you're
claiming our society would have these
benefits in future if we lacked those
government services this this should be
proof positive for your Radiology so why
do we see that or why why do we not see
that now the the fellow I debated that
with that anarcho-capitalist you know to
be honest I think he was just too stupid
and too ornery to really take it on
board but he had no answer for this he
really could not deal with a simple
real-world example like the history of
Native people within its own country
it's very obvious when you just glance
at this you can again you can look at
adjacent communities it's not the case
that the privileged white people are
being oppressed by being provided with
sewage sewage treatment running water
drinking water electricity access to
health care schools etc whereas the
Native Americans nearby are being
liberated or have some advantage by
being deprived of these things that has
just not been the case and to some
extent still today it's not the case
today there's a general situation of
trying to catch up in some cases try to
overcompensate by providing exactly the
services that work that we're lacking
for so long on indigenous reservations
so any of these ideologies if we just
draw them out into the workshop of ideas
away from the museum of ideas and into
the workshop of ideas very quickly they
start to they start to fall apart with
both you know with libertarians and
anarchists and these other flavors like
America isn't in between I have I have
very rarely heard any intelligent
response to to simply questioning how do
you plan to deal with sewage treatment
or indeed even if you want to do it a
little bit more of an abstract way
dealing with the virtues the question
how in what sense is it immoral for
government to get organized and deal
with water pollution in the form of soot
stream why is that immoral because many
of them use these
very extreme bold statements that any
kind of government intervention like
this is theft and as a crime and is
terribly oppressive well people need to
get organized and make sure that they're
not poisoning themselves by having
sewage dumped into the river and then
end up drinking that same water further
down the river among other problems is
cholera this is not the only health
problem you're gonna have through
improper handling of sewage and improper
management of your drink water so a
central authority to organize and manage
sewage and the sources of drinking water
and to enforce standards for both
obviously this is going to be handled by
a government which all around the world
many many governments do a very good job
of or it's going to be handled by
another organization that will resemble
the government in practically every
sense so if you lived in a society that
didn't have government water quality
assurance drinking water and sewage
treatment if you just imagine what are
the necessary features the agency that
does this well it needs have a
centralized Authority it needs to
collect a small amount of money from
everyone who's benefiting from the
service so if it's not taxation it's
going to be a type of fee for drinking
water and using the toilets which will
resemble taxation and it's gonna have to
have special rights and privileges to
dig up pipes to you know suddenly make
repairs and snoop around and install
things like sewers and sewage treatment
plants it's going to need a sense of
they're going to have to be
extraordinary legal privileges given to
this agency that's managing sewage
treatment if it is not the government so
if you imagine a deeply Catholic society
if the Catholic Church took over sewage
treatment and the provision of clean
drinking water the Catholic Church would
step-by-step start to take on many of
the characteristics of a government and
if it were not the Catholic Church if
were a corporation a huge corporation
like Samsung in in South Korea well
Samsung would start to resemble the
government process because they'd be
involved in in this type of operation
and with collecting the funds to support
and so on and so forth so
even if it were privatised were not
really escaping the same the same
questions whether they want to phrase
them as justice and injustice or just
questions of practical implementation if
you had two adjacent countries over a
period of 100 years and one of these
countries was fastidiously adhering to a
minner cast doctrine some inner chasm is
basically anarchism light or even
libertarianism light midair chasm is
kind of the easiest the most presentable
of these ideologies menarche ism is the
idea that you should minimize the power
and authority of the state have
government reduced to essential
functions some people like to say that
the government serves as a night
watchman so you still have police and
the military and probably you know some
infrastructure role like roads and
electricity but you strip the government
to the great you strip the government
down to its minimal essential aspects as
much as possible and of course this
again if you guys are familiar this
resembles what libertarians often say
and what an especially integral
capitalist but many types of anarchists
will say so when they're not talking
about completely eliminating government
minimizing government in a sense if we
had a contrast between two adjacent
countries where in one country people
lived with the sort of terrible neglect
that indigenous people of America had
certainly for at least the first couple
centuries of their history after they
were forced onto native reservations no
access to health care or education
running water electricity if they had
even the same kind of neglect that
African Americans had when they were put
in to get ghettos and when they were
settled as sharecroppers after the
abolition of slavery but before that
achieved the real civil rights
inequality if you have one country where
this wasn't the status of the oppressed
minority but was the way the whole
country ran if this would be montork ism
this would be live
arianism or anarcho-capitalism where
they were just left to to sort things
over themselves in this manner and
indeed you know where they were lied on
therefore the source of Education
Christian missionaries or other
charitable agencies do the lack of
government involvement in these things
um and that they're next door there was
a country with the same kind of shall we
say mainstream moderate democracy
policies that you see in in Denmark and
Sweden the government providing schools
hospitals roads electricity
infrastructure that the government
pursuing excellence by building up an
expansive and expensive welfare state if
you have the welfare state adjacent to a
mineral estate for a libertarian state
over a period of 100 years which society
will perform better in all the ways that
really matter this may sound a little
bit too hypothetical for you guys but
we've actually just lived through a long
period of history when tremendously
powerful political forces conspired
openly conspired to make this sort of
experiment happen what do you think the
arrangement was the created the contrast
between East Germany and West Germany it
was a very open political arrangement
between the Soviet Union and the United
States primarily England and other
countries were also involved it was an
arrangement in which both sides thought
that they would prove the strength of
their ideology by showing how much
better they could rebuild a Germany what
what the new site what sort of new
society they could create in the rubble
and ashes of Germany after World War two
and you will note that during periods of
time when there was outright starvation
in the Soviet Union and China there was
not starvation in East Germany where
people were starving in the Ukraine
there were still rations of rice wheat
and what have you being sent to East
Germany I very I recently read about
even China's involvement of that that's
why I mentioned rice it's actually China
exporting rice to the east
there was overall a sense that East
Germany had to be the showpiece for the
success of the communist system the
success of the socialist economy the
command economy that they had to make
you know the quality of the apartments
and the food and the life that people
were enjoying in East Germany they had
to be able to show this to Western
Europe and say hey see how much better
life is in East Germany the western me
now you know I don't even have to insert
a footnote here from my perspective life
in East Germany was horrible you can
watch there have been several actually
very good movies made by people who grew
up in East Germany about what life was
like documentaries and fiction films
talking about the subtle ways in which
it was horrible however they had a
budget this was trying to show off how
wonderful communism could be and
meanwhile West Germany that's the side
of Germany you guys are more familiar
with was the capitalist paradise and to
some extent Western powers were putting
time and attention and money into
rebuilding West Germany to be a bit of a
showpiece for how good the Western
European model the Democratic capitols
Malka p and guess what both sides of the
Cold War were delighted with this
arrangement they said great we have two
countries adjacent to each other
proving their respective ideological
systems peacefully competing in showing
who has a better ideologies so they
decided to do it again they decided they
would do again in the partition of North
Korea versus South Korea and that's a
partition that still endures to this day
they decided they would do it again in
the partition of Taiwan from mainland
China and in the earlier period of
American involvement in Taiwan one of
the main forms of CIA involvement was
actually improving the farming
technology in Taiwan they wanted to make
sure that Taiwan had the best pineapple
farms in Asia and this kind of thing
they wanted to show because a lot of the
Communists cared a lot about farming and
agriculture they wanted to show that in
Taiwan the farmers were prosperous and
you know there this is marvelous quality
of living and very productive while
people were as it turns out starving in
communist China but Communist China the
Soviet Union they also they were
obsessed with having highly
productive farms and their results were
of course tragic but that's what they
were trying to achieve and it's
hilarious
to read it won't know it depends on your
sense of humor it's hilarious or it's
tragic to read the perspective of
Richard Nixon when he's complaining that
all he was trying to do in Vietnam was
the same thing that they had already
done in separating North Korea from
South Korea the the ending to the war he
was trying to arrange at least an
Israeli they said oh well why couldn't
they just divide Vietnam into North
Vietnam and South Vietnam and then
likewise act out this already familiar
script of having two adjacent countries
the two political systems so this is
actually a very overt part of political
history in the 20th century and now the
21st century the idea of on an
experimental basis having the same
ethnic group of people the same language
group of people the same culture divided
into two halves with two ideological
systems two political systems and see
how it plays out see who wins have a
sense of nonviolent competition between
political ideologies so in this sort of
scenario I just say whether you're
talking it through with a libertarian an
anarchist an intrical capitalist or a
men are kissed I don't think that anyone
working this through in a pragmatic
level could possibly believe that if you
have a North Korea versus South Korea
sort of contrast that a poorly governed
country is going to outperform a well
governed country that's ultimately we're
talking about that a country where
government takes no positive part in
education where it takes no positive
part in expanding infrastructure
supporting the progress of science where
the government takes no positive part in
for example prisons and prison education
trying to reform and improve people who
have committed crimes and end up in
prison where the government takes no
positive part in dealing with drug
addicts and trying to reduce or
eliminate drug addiction these things
can become an epidemic quite easily
there are many historical you know
examples of this countries where
the percentage the population who are
organics gets way out of control
um the myriad ways in which government
can be positively involved in shaping
the future development of society I mean
yes of course there gonna be some
examples that look a bit absurd did the
United States really need to send a man
to the moon did Canada really need to be
build the the Grand Trunk Railway the
ground Grand Trunk Railway is a famous
you know failure of Canadian Canadian
history Canadian infrastructure projects
when I was a boy we still had government
debt in the books from building that
railroad you know yes there are
boondoggles there are laughable failures
and so on
but what we're really talking about in
embracing libertarianism and mannerism
is basically the idea that rather than
trying and failing it would be better to
to not try at all and in the in the in
the laboratory of ideas and the workshop
of ideas in terms of testing and proving
these things I think it's very clear
that the outcomes would be would be much
much worse now I just end this video by
saying both the museum and the
laboratory sorry both the museum and the
workshop have some positive role to play
and talking about this kind of political
philosophy either a policy is bad in
itself it's just bad regarded in
isolation and abstract or you think it's
bad merely on account of who is carrying
it out right so I do think that is a bad
idea to have the Catholic Church run
prisons I think it's a bad idea to have
the Catholic Church run schools for
children however I do not think that
schools are a bad idea in themselves I
do not think that prisons are a bad idea
in themselves I understand that many
people who are on the anarchist and
libertarian end of the spectrum really
sincerely have so much apprehension and
hostility towards government that they
regard the concept of
government-administered schools as
something as as odious as threatening as
I might
guard a Catholic run school and guys in
case you're watching this and you're
baffled that I would be afraid to put my
kids into a Catholic school how would
you feel about putting your kids into a
Muslim school how about a Muslim
fundamentalist school how about a school
that's run by the Taliban this really
exists in Afghanistan and elsewhere how
about a school run by the Muslim
Brotherhood or any other fundamentalist
Muslim group well now think about how I
would feel
putting my kids into a Catholic school
I'm not comfortable with it I'm not
comfortable with children anywhere being
raised under the religious authority and
educational authority of the Catholic
Church that's deeply problematic
I think that's deeply problematic and if
you don't think that about the Catholic
Church then you must think it about some
religion whether it's Islam or Hinduism
or some hypothetical cult group you just
have to imagine you can't possibly be
satisfied with any and every ideologies
running schools nor any and every
ideologies running hospitals prisons
sewage treatment plants being
responsible for testing and ensuring
that the the drinking water coming out
of your tap is safe um and it is a
peculiar thing to say that the concept
of government controlled services is
vindicated precisely because a
government is not beholden to any one
ideology or to any one religion that
ultimately it is beholden to the people
and that's the puzzle of democracy that
we've all been struggling with since
Aristotle lived and died and passed us
the torch to carry ahead but ultimately
a prison or a hospital or a school run
by a government it may be as bad as that
government but it also may be as good as
the people can force their government to
be and I for my part and very confident
that I have more bargaining power with
my government I have more lobbying power
with my government I have more purchase
and democratic principle to influence my
government then I could ever possibly
have and try to influence Islam or
Catholicism to reform and teach
principle
that are contrary to their deeply vested
interests okay guys thanks your time
this has been Believe It or Not the
single most requested video of my
channel in the past two years many many
people wrote in asking me to speak on
libertarianism they asked for so long
that I forgot that I hadn't yet gotten
around to doing it thanks to your time
the usual links are below this video hit
me up on patreon follow me on Twitter
write to me by email hit me up